My name is Dan Llywelyn Hall. I’m a BP artist
from 2009, my entry was Harry Patch. I’ve
entered the BP Portrait Award probably about
6 times prior to being eventually selected
for it. And on each occasion, the thought
that I’d get in and didn’t… And then
eventually this portrait of Harry Patch was
selected. It was quite topical at the time
obviously Harry Patch, the last Tommy, had
actually died during the run of the exhibition
and so it made it even more poignant, and
the fact that the image was used as posters
across the Underground. I did feel quite proud
that I’d sort of caught a moment in history
which I was, felt privileged to be involved
in.
Painting Harry Patch was probably the most
moving of situations I’d been in, I think,
probably in my life I think, because I’d
built myself up to it for quite a long time.
I’d initially thought about painting about
8 years before I did it. And I wanted to be
the person to paint the last person to set
eyes on the trenches, and experience the First
World War. And, for me, seeing him the first
time, he was at the time living in a retirement
home and he was, he’d dressed for the occasion
so he’d been wearing medals and things.
I came into this area and he was sitting on
his own. And he just looked like a man who
was entirely on his own, he’d had none of
his contemporaries around him. The man was
111 when I saw him. So, it really overwhelmed
me. And I think that helped for the portrait.
Now, had I worked from reference from photographs
and not met him, it wouldn’t have worked.
That, for me, consolidated the idea of having
to be with the subject, and work with the
subject and experience it. And then, that
helped me then make the work in the volume
that I did.
Successful portraits are ones which are ultimately
a good painting, a good picture. And that
we don’t feel as though we have engage with
the sitter. They become the portraits in their
own right. Much like a writer would start
a story, from a particular experience and
then go off on a tangent, something that’s
well away from an actual truth about a subject,
but that’s underpinned by the subject being
a sitter.